Add Connectable operators: :<=, :>=, :<>=, and :#= (#2806)
chipsalliance/chisel3: docs/src/explanations/connectable.md

---

layout: docs

title:  "Connectable Operators"

section: "chisel3"

---

> The `Connectable` operators are the standard way to connect Chisel hardware components to one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Connectable` operators are the standard way to connect Chisel hardware components to one another.
```

moving this question higher, what is a "component"? do people understand that term? Should we define it as "A chisel Data that is bound to hardware (IO, Reg, Wire, (dataview? lit?))

> Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see `connection-operators.md`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see `connection-operators.md`.
```

> All connection operators require the two hardware components (consumer and producer) to be Chisel type-equivalent (matching bundle field names and types, vector sizes, ground types (UInt/SInt)). Use `DataMirror.checkTypeEquivalence` to check this property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All connection operators require the two hardware components (consumer and producer) to be Chisel type-equivalent (matching bundle field names and types (Record vs Vector vs Element), vector sizes, ground types (UInt/SInt/Bool/Clock etc)). Use `DataMirror.checkTypeEquivalence` to check this property.
```

> The one exception to the type-equivalence rule is using the `WaivedData` mechansim, detailed at the end of this document.

Reviewer: i think you can link with like (#waived-data)?

> Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another. Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. The following are the Chisel connection operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another. Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel `Data` subclasses. The following are the Chisel connection operators:
```

not sure what a "component" means here? is it a commonly understood term?

> Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another. Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. The following are the Chisel connection operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregate (Record, Vec, Bundle) Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another. Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. The following are the Chisel connection operators:
```

>  - `c := p` (mono-direction): assigns all p fields to c; requires c & p to not have flips

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `c := p` (mono-direction): assigns all p fields to c; requires c & p to not have any flipped fields
```

>  - `c :#= p` (coercing mono-direction): assigns all p fields to c; ignores all flips

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `c :#= p` (coercing mono-direction): assigns all p fields to c; regardless of alignment
```

 - `c :<= p` (aligned-direction); assigns all aligned (non-flipped) c fields from p
 - `c :>= p` (flipped-direction); assigns all flipped p fields from c
 - `c :<>= p` (bi-direction operator); assigns all aligned c fields from p; all flipped p fields from c

## Alignment: Flipped vs Aligned

> A field's alignment is a relative property; a field is aligned/flipped relative to another member. Hence, one must always say whether a field is flipped/aligned *with respect to (w.r.t)* another member of that type (parent, sibling, child etc.).

Reviewer: i think you might be well served to give a quick terminology of "component" , "field"  and "member" here and be sure you are only using those terms. For example we say "element" in the code, why are we calling it "member" here? Whats a difference between a "field" and a "member"?

We use the following example of a non-nested bundle `Parent` to let us state all of the alignment relationships between members of `p`.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class Parent extends Bundle {

>   val foo = UInt(32.W)
>   val bar = Flipped(UInt(32.W))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val alignedChild = UInt(32.W)
  val flippedChild = Flipped(UInt(32.W))
```

Reviewer: i think putting aligned and flipped into the names really helps mapping the concepts

}
class MyModule0 extends Module {
  val p = Wire(new Parent)
}
```

First, every member is always aligned with themselves:
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p`
 - `p.foo` is aligned w.r.t `p.foo`
 - `p.bar` is aligned w.r.t `p.bar`

Next, we list all parent/child relationships. Because the `bar` field is `Flipped`, it changes its aligment relative to its parent. 
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p.foo`
 - `p` is flipped w.r.t `p.bar`

Finally, we can list all sibling relationships:
 - `p.foo` is flipped w.r.t `p.bar`

The next example has a nested bundle `GrandParent` who instantiates an aligned `Parent` field and flipped `Parent` field.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class GrandParent extends Bundle {

>   val parent = new Parent()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val alignedParent = new Parent()
```

  val flippedParent = Flipped(new Parent())
}
class MyModule1 extends Module {
  val g = Wire(new GrandParent)
}
```

Consider the following alignements between grandparent and grandchildren. An odd number of flips indicate a flipped relationship; even numbers of flips indicate an aligned relationship.

>  - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.flippedParent.bar`
>  - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.parent.foo`
>  - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedParent.foo`
>  - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.parent.bar`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.flippedParent.flippedChild`
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.alignedParent.flippedChild`
```

putting it into the names makes the sentence above really easy to see

 - `g.parent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.parent.foo`
 - `g.flippedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.foo`
 - `g.parent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.parent.bar`
 - `g.flippedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.bar`

In summary, a field is aligned or flipped w.r.t. another member of the hardware component. This means that the type of the consumer/producer is the only information needed to determine the behavior of any operator. *Whether the consumer/producer is a subfield of a larger bundle is irrelevant; you ONLY need to know the type of the consumer/producer*.

## Input/Output/IO (Maybe talk about later once I fix Chisel directionality?)

`Input(gen)`/`Output(gen)` are coercing operators. They perform two functions: (1) create a new Chisel type that has all flips removed from all recursive children fields but structurally equivalent to `gen`, and (2) apply `Flipped` if `Input`, keep aligned (do nothing) if `Output`.

> 

Reviewer: we could put a note to link to the issue about fixing this stuff

Reviewer: val foo = IO(Input(Bool())) val bar = IO(Output(Bool)))

foo is aligned to foo
bar is aligned to bar
foo :<>= bar would attempt to generate foo <= bar, chisel is fine w that but we check that foo is not assignable ("can firrtl connect aggregates")

Reviewer: val foo = IO (Flipped(Decoupled(Bool)) val bar = IO (Aligned(Decoupled(Bool))

foo.bits :<>= bar.bits
// foo.bits is aligned relative to foo.bits, bar.bits is aligned relative to bar.bits

foo.bits  <= bar.bits

## Input/Output

`Input(gen)`/`Output(gen)` are coercing operators. They perform two functions: (1) create a new Chisel type that has all flips removed from all recursive children fields but structurally equivalent to `gen`, and (2) apply `Flipped` if `Input`, keep aligned (do nothing) if `Output`. E.g. if we imagine a function called `cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips`, then `Input(gen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips(gen))`.

Note that if `gen` is a non-aggregate, then `Input(nonAggregateGen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(nonAggregateGen)`.

> Future work will refactor how these primitives are exposed to the user to make Chisel's type system more intuitive.

With this in mind, we can consider the following examples and detail relative alignments of fields.

First, we can use a similar example to `Parent` but use `Input/Output` instead of `Flipped`.
Because `foo` and `bar` are non-aggregates, `Input` is basically just a `Flipped` and thus the alignments are unchanged compared to the previous `Parent` example.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._

> class ParentWithOutputInput extends Bundle {
>   val foo = Output(UInt(32.W)) // Equivalent to just UInt(32.W)
>   val bar = Input(UInt(32.W))  // Equivalent to Flipped(UInt(32.W))
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class ParentWithOutputInput extends Bundle {
  val alignedChild = Output(UInt(32.W)) // Equivalent to just UInt(32.W)
  val flippedChild = Input(UInt(32.W))  // Equivalent to Flipped(UInt(32.W))
}
```

class MyModule2 extends Module {
  val p = Wire(new ParentWithOutputInput)
}
```

The aligments are the same as the previous `Parent` example:
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p`
 - `p.foo` is aligned w.r.t `p.foo`
 - `p.bar` is aligned w.r.t `p.bar`
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p.foo`
 - `p` is flipped w.r.t `p.bar`
 - `p.foo` is flipped w.r.t `p.bar`

The next example has a nested bundle `GrandParent` who instantiates an `Output` `ParentWithOutputInput` field and an `Input` `ParentWithOutputInput` field.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class GrandParent extends Bundle {

>   val o = Output(new ParentWithOutputInput())
>   val i = Input(new ParentWithOutputInput())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val coercedAligned = Output(new ParentWithOutputInput())
  val coercedFlipped = Input(new ParentWithOutputInput())
```

maybe? I like the o and i too, but keeping aligned and fliipped terminology could help?

 - `g.o` is aligned w.r.t. `g.o.foo`
 - `g.i` is aligned w.r.t. `g.i.foo`
 - `g.o` is aligned w.r.t. `g.o.bar`
 - `g.i` is aligned w.r.t. `g.i.bar`

In summary, `Input(gen)` and `Output(gen)` recursively coerce children alignment, as well as dictate `gen`'s alignment to its parent bundle (if it exists).

## Connecting components with fully aligned members

For simple connections where all members of aligned (non-flipped) with one another, use `:=`:

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class FullyAlignedBundle extends Bundle {
  val a = Bool()
  val b = Bool()
}
class Example0 extends RawModule {
  val foo = IO(Flipped(new FullyAlignedBundle))
  val bar = IO(new FullyAlignedBundle)
  bar := foo
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where each member of `foo` drives every member of `bar`:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example0())
```

## Connections for components with members of mixed-alignment

> Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another; in the example below, `a` and `b` are aligned/flipped relative to `MixedAlignmentBundle`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregate Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another; in the example below, `a` and `b` are aligned/flipped relative to `MixedAlignmentBundle`.
```

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class MixedAlignmentBundle extends Bundle {

>   val a = Bool()
>   val b = Flipped(Bool())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val aligned = Bool()
  val flipped = Flipped(Bool())
```

```

While `foo.b`'s alignment with `foo` does not affect our operators, it does influence whether `foo.b` is an output or input port of my module.
A common source of confusion is to mistake the process for determining whether `foo.b` is an output/input (the port-direction computation) with the process for determing how `:<>=` connects who to who (the connection-direction computation).
While both processes consider relative alignment, they are distinct.

The port-direction computation always computes alignment relative to the component marked with `IO`. An `IO(Flipped(gen))` is an input port, and any member of `gen` that is aligned/flipped with `gen` is an input/output port. An `IO(gen)` is an output port, and any member of `gen` that is aligned/flipped with `gen` is an output/input port.

The connection-direction computation always computes alignment based on explicit consumer/producer referenced for the connection. If one connects `foo :<>= bar`, alignments are computed based on `foo` and `bar`. If I connect `foo.a :<>= bar.a`, then alignments are computed based on `foo.a` and `bar.a` (and the alignment of `foo` to `foo.a` is irrelevant).

> This means that users can try to assign to input ports of their module! If I write `x :<>= y`, and `x` is an input to my module, then that is what the connection is trying to do. However, because input ports are not assignable from within my module, Chisel will throw an error. This is the same error a user would get using a mono-directioned operator: `x := y` will throw the same error if `x` is an input module. *Whether a component is assignable is irrelevant to the semantics of any connection operator assigning to it.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that users can try to assign to input ports of their module! If I write `x :<>= y`, and `x` is an input to the current module, then that is what the connection is trying to do. However, because input ports are not assignable from within my module, Chisel will throw an error. This is the same error a user would get using a mono-directioned operator: `x := y` will throw the same error if `x` is an input module. *Whether a component is assignable is irrelevant to the semantics of any connection operator assigning to it.*
```

In summary, the port-direction computation is relative to the root marked `IO`, but connection-direction computation is relative to the consumer/producer that the connection is doing. This has the positive property that connection semantics are solely based on the Chisel types of the consumer/producer (nothing more, nothing less).

> ### Bi-direction connection operator (:<>=)

Reviewer: shouldn't you have described this before the section above?

Author: I was torn which should go first... What do you think?

Reviewer: maybe this first, and then the direction thing next?

For connections where you want 'bulk-connect-like-semantics' where the aligned fields are driven producer-to-consumer and flipped fields are driven consumer-to-producer, use `:<>=`.

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example1 extends RawModule {

>   val foo = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))

Reviewer: can we use the terms "producer" and "consumer" instead of "foo" and "bar" for these?

Author: switched to incoming and outgoing.

class Example2 extends RawModule {
  val foo = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val bar = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  foo.b := DontCare // Otherwise FIRRTL throws an uninitialization error
  bar :<= foo
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where the aligned members are driven `foo` to `bar` and flipped members are ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example2())
```

### Flipped connection operator (:>=)

For connections where you want the flipped-half of 'bulk-connect-like-semantics' where the aligned fields are ignored and flipped fields are assigned consumer-to-producer, use `:<=` (the "flipped connection", or "backpressure connection").

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example3 extends RawModule {
  val foo = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val bar = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  bar.a := DontCare // Otherwise FIRRTL throws an uninitialization error
  bar :>= foo
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where the aligned members are ignore and the flipped members are driven `bar` to `foo`:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example3())
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Astute observers will realize that semantically :<>= is exactly equivalent to :<= followed by :>=.
```

### Coercing mono-direction connection operator (:#=)

For connections where you want to every producer field to always drive every consumer field, regardless of alignment, use `:#=` (the "coercion connection"). This operator is useful for initializing wires whose types contain members of mixed alignment.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3.experimental.BundleLiterals._
class Example4 extends RawModule {
  val bar = Wire(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  dontTouch(bar) // So we see it in the output verilog
  bar :#= (new MixedAlignmentBundle).Lit(_.a -> true.B, _.b -> true.B)
}
```

> This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven `foo` to `bar`, regardless of alignment:

Reviewer: there is no foo in the above. can you assign foo to the temporary? Can we call it "literal"?

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4())
```

> ## Waived Data

Reviewer: i think you should have a top-level sectoin here for "how to connect data that is NOT the same type"? It seems we have a few patterns here (maybe this should be a cookbook not here)?

0. manually bursting out individual fields
1. Waived data
2. .viewAsSuperType
3. (gonna ignore viewAs something not super type as that's just
4. something else?

Reviewer: also, how does dataview play with all this? IS a DataView the same as a Wire? or is it a Bundle?

Author: Added a section. Dataview is a `View` I believe, which mean's its a "component", if that is what you are asking.

  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
class Example5 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupled()))
  val out = IO(new MyReadyValid())
  out :<>= in.waive(_.bits)
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `ready` and `valid` are connected, and `bits` is ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example5())
```

### Connecting types with optional fields

In the following example, we can use `:<>=` and `waive` to connect two `MyDecoupledOpts`'s, where only one has a `bits` member.

```scala mdoc:silent
class MyDecoupledOpt(hasBits: Boolean) extends Bundle {
  val valid = Bool()
  val ready = Flipped(Bool())
  val bits = if (hasBits) Some(UInt(32.W)) else None
}
class Example6 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupledOpt(true)))
  val out = IO(new MyDecoupledOpt(false))
  out :<>= in.waive(_.bits.get) // We can know to call .get because we can inspect in.bits.isEmpty
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `ready` and `valid` are connected, and `bits` is ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example6())
```

> ### Connecting different sub-types

Reviewer: maybe before waivable we should explain the different sub-types assignment anyway, like:

```
class HasBits extends MyReadyValid {
  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
```
```
class ADifferentHasBits extends MyReadyValid {
  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
```

show how to cast them both to MyReadyValid -- but importantly they WILL still connect their `bits`! As opposed to .viewAsSuperType[MyReadyValid]!
This is important distinction

> ---

Reviewer: please add this to the explanations ToC

Author: Am I missing something? Where is the ToC?

Reviewer: https://github.com/chipsalliance/chisel3/blob/master/docs/src/explanations/explanations.md

layout: docs

title:  "Connectable Operators"

section: "chisel3"

---

## Terminology

> - "Chisel type" - a `Data` that is not bound to hardware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Chisel type" - a `Data` that is not bound to hardware (more details[here](chisel-type-vs-scala-type)).
```

  - E.g. `UInt(3.W)`, `new Bundle {..}`, `Vec(3, SInt(2.W))` are all Chisel types

> - `Aggregate` - a Chisel type or component that contains other Chisel types or components (i.e. Vec, Record, Bundle)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Aggregate` - a Chisel type or component that contains other Chisel types or components (`Vec`, `Record`, or `Bundle`)
```

- `Element` - a Chisel type or component that does not contain other Chisel types or components (e.g. UInt, SInt, Clock, Bool etc.)
- "component" - a `Data` that is bound to hardware (`IO`, `Reg`, `Wire`, etc.)
  - E.g. `Wire(UInt(3.W))` is a component, whose type is `UInt(3.W)`

> - "member" - a child Chisel type or component of a parent Chisel type or component (could be an `Aggregate` or an `Element`)

Reviewer: so is `member` meaningless for Wire(Bool())? if so we should say it is part of an `Aggregate` parent chisel type?

Author: I think technically, a member can include the parent, so I updated the definition accordingly.

  - E.g. `Vec(3, UInt(2.W))(0)` is a member of the parent `Vec` Chisel type
  - E.g. `Wire(Vec(3, UInt(2.W)))(0)` is a member of the parent `Wire` component

> For more details about these Scala types vs Chisel types, please read [this document](chisel-type-vs-scala-type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

think this is only relevant for first bullet point

## Overview

The `Connectable` operators are the standard way to connect Chisel hardware components to one another.

> Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see `connection-operators.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see [`Connection Operators`](connection-operators).
```

 - `g.flippedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g.alignedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.alignedParent.flippedChild`
 - `g.flippedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.flippedChild`

In summary, a member is aligned or flipped w.r.t. another member of the hardware component. This means that the type of the consumer/producer is the only information needed to determine the behavior of any operator. *Whether the consumer/producer is a member of a larger bundle is irrelevant; you ONLY need to know the type of the consumer/producer*.

## Input/Output

`Input(gen)`/`Output(gen)` are coercing operators. They perform two functions: (1) create a new Chisel type that has all flips removed from all recursive children members but structurally equivalent to `gen`, and (2) apply `Flipped` if `Input`, keep aligned (do nothing) if `Output`. E.g. if we imagine a function called `cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips`, then `Input(gen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips(gen))`.

Note that if `gen` is a non-aggregate, then `Input(nonAggregateGen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(nonAggregateGen)`.

> > Future work will refactor how these primitives are exposed to the user to make Chisel's type system more intuitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Future work will refactor how these primitives are exposed to the user to make Chisel's type system more intuitive. See [https://github.com/chipsalliance/chisel3/issues/2643].
```

First, we can use a similar example to `Parent` but use `Input/Output` instead of `Flipped`.
Because `alignedChild` and `flippedChild` are non-aggregates, `Input` is basically just a `Flipped` and thus the alignments are unchanged compared to the previous `Parent` example.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class ParentWithOutputInput extends Bundle {
  val alignedCoerced = Output(UInt(32.W)) // Equivalent to just UInt(32.W)
  val flippedCoerced = Input(UInt(32.W))  // Equivalent to Flipped(UInt(32.W))
}
class MyModule2 extends Module {
  val p = Wire(new ParentWithOutputInput)
}
```

The aligments are the same as the previous `Parent` example:
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p`
 - `p.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t `p.alignedCoerced`
 - `p.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t `p.flippedCoerced`
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p.alignedCoerced`
 - `p` is flipped w.r.t `p.flippedCoerced`
 - `p.alignedCoerced` is flipped w.r.t `p.flippedCoerced`

The next example has a nested bundle `GrandParent` who instantiates an `Output` `ParentWithOutputInput` field and an `Input` `ParentWithOutputInput` field.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class GrandParent extends Bundle {

>   val o = Output(new ParentWithOutputInput())
>   val i = Input(new ParentWithOutputInput())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val alignedCoerced = Output(new ParentWithOutputInput())
  val flippedCoerced = Input(new ParentWithOutputInput())
```

you changed the text below but didn't change this here, one is wrong :)

}
```

Remember that `Output(gen)/Input(gen)` recursively strips the `Flipped` of any recursive children.
This makes every member of `gen` aligned with every other member of `gen`.

Consider the following alignments between grandparent and grandchildren. Because `alignedCoerced` and `flippedCoerced` are aligned with all their recursive members, they are fully aligned. Thus, only their alignment to `g` influences grandchildren alignment:
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

Consider the following alignment relationships starting from `g.alignedCoerced` and `g.flippedCoerced`. *Note that whether `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned/flipped relative to `g` has no effect on the aligned/flipped relationship between `g.alignedCoerced` and `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild` or `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild` because alignment is only relative to the two members in question! However, because alignment is coerced, everything is aligned between `g.alignedCoerced`/`g.flippedAligned` and their children*:

>  - `g.o` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.i` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
>  - `g.o` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.i` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild` <--- this one seems wrong
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`.  <--- this one seems wrong
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`
```

In summary, `Input(gen)` and `Output(gen)` recursively coerce children alignment, as well as dictate `gen`'s alignment to its parent bundle (if it exists).

## Connecting components with fully aligned members

For simple connections where all members of aligned (non-flipped) with one another, use `:=`:

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class FullyAlignedBundle extends Bundle {
  val a = Bool()
  val b = Bool()
}
class Example0 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new FullyAlignedBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new FullyAlignedBundle)
  outgoing := incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where each member of `incoming` drives every member of `outgoing`:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example0())
```

> > You may be thinking "Wait, I'm confused! Isn't foo flipped and bar is aligned?" -- Noo! Remember that the alignment of members is computed relative to the component the operator is connecting! Because components are always aligned to themselves, `bar` is aligned to `bar`, and `foo` is aligned to `foo`, there is no problem. Their relative flippedness to anything else is irrelevant (whether foo is aligned with bar makes no sense - you only evaluate alignment to members of the same component or Chisel type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You may be thinking "Wait, I'm confused! Isn't `foo` flipped and `bar` is aligned?" -- No! Remember that the alignment of members is computed relative to the component the operator is connecting. Because components are always aligned to themselves, `bar` is aligned to `bar`, and `foo` is aligned to `foo`. Their relative flippedness to anything else is irrelevant (questioning whether foo is aligned with bar makes no sense - you only evaluate alignment to members of the same component or Chisel type).
```

---

layout: docs

title:  "Connectable Operators"

section: "chisel3"

---

## Terminology

- "Chisel type" - a `Data` that is not bound to hardware (more details[here](chisel-type-vs-scala-type)).
  - E.g. `UInt(3.W)`, `new Bundle {..}`, `Vec(3, SInt(2.W))` are all Chisel types
- `Aggregate` - a Chisel type or component that contains other Chisel types or components (i.e. `Vec`, `Record`, or `Bundle`)
- `Element` - a Chisel type or component that does not contain other Chisel types or components (e.g. `UInt`, `SInt`, `Clock`, `Bool` etc.)
- "component" - a `Data` that is bound to hardware (`IO`, `Reg`, `Wire`, etc.)

>   - E.g. `Wire(UInt(3.W))` is a component, whose type is `UInt(3.W)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - E.g. `Wire(UInt(3.W))` is a component, whose Chisel type is `UInt(3.W)`
```

> - "member" - a Chisel type or component or any of its children (could be an `Aggregate` or an `Element`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "member" - a Chisel type or component, or any of its children (could be an `Aggregate` or an `Element`)
```

  - E.g. `Vec(3, UInt(2.W))(0)` is a member of the parent `Vec` Chisel type

>   - E.g. `Wire(Vec(3, UInt(2.W)))(0)` is a member of the parent `Wire` component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - E.g. `Wire(Vec(3, UInt(2.W)))(0)` is a member of the parent `Wire` component
  - E.g. `IO(Decoupled(Bool)).ready` is a member of the parent `IO` component
  
```

For more details about these Scala types vs Chisel types, please read 

## Overview

The `Connectable` operators are the standard way to connect Chisel hardware components to one another.

> Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see [`Connection Operators`](connection-operators).

> All connection operators require the two hardware components (consumer and producer) to be Chisel type-equivalent (matching bundle field names and types (`Record` vs `Vector` vs `Element`), vector sizes, `Element` types (UInt/SInt/Bool/Clock etc)). Use `DataMirror.checkTypeEquivalence` to check this property.

Reviewer: should this sentence say something about alignments needing to match? This is confusingly ambiguous throughout the article. Does "Chisel type equivalence" include alignment check or not? Later you use a term "structurally equivalent" which you never define here. Can you define it here and contrast it with Chisel type equivalence? Or is there another term "Chisel Type equivalence, including alignment check"?

Author: So right now, chisel type equivalence does not include an alignment check. In the future, I'd like to check alignment but that can only happen after we do the fixes to directionality I want to do after the connectable stuff. The way I'd categorize it is there is (1) a structural check (current type equivalence) and (2) a structural check + alignment check (future type equivalence). However, we do need both concepts regardless, so I'll clarify.

 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.alignedParent.flippedChild`

Consider the following alignment relationships starting from `g.alignedParent` and `g.flippedParent`. *Note that whether `g.alignedParent` is aligned/flipped relative to `g` has no effect on the aligned/flipped relationship between `g.alignedParent` and `g.alignedParent.alignedChild` because alignment is only relative to the two members in question!*:
 - `g.alignedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g.alignedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.alignedParent.flippedChild`
 - `g.flippedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.flippedChild`

In summary, a member is aligned or flipped w.r.t. another member of the hardware component. This means that the type of the consumer/producer is the only information needed to determine the behavior of any operator. *Whether the consumer/producer is a member of a larger bundle is irrelevant; you ONLY need to know the type of the consumer/producer*.

## Input/Output

> `Input(gen)`/`Output(gen)` are coercing operators. They perform two functions: (1) create a new Chisel type that has all flips removed from all recursive children members but structurally equivalent to `gen`, and (2) apply `Flipped` if `Input`, keep aligned (do nothing) if `Output`. E.g. if we imagine a function called `cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips`, then `Input(gen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips(gen))`.

Reviewer: you have never explained what "structurally equivalent is". And this sentence seems to imply that the chisel type does include the alignment, but its unclear if alignments need to match for chisel type equivalence.

}
```

Remember that `Output(gen)/Input(gen)` recursively strips the `Flipped` of any recursive children.
This makes every member of `gen` aligned with every other member of `gen`.

Consider the following alignments between grandparent and grandchildren. Because `alignedCoerced` and `flippedCoerced` are aligned with all their recursive members, they are fully aligned. Thus, only their alignment to `g` influences grandchildren alignment:
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g` is aligned w.r.t `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g` is flipped w.r.t `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

Consider the following alignment relationships starting from `g.alignedCoerced` and `g.flippedCoerced`. *Note that whether `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned/flipped relative to `g` has no effect on the aligned/flipped relationship between `g.alignedCoerced` and `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild` or `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild` because alignment is only relative to the two members in question! However, because alignment is coerced, everything is aligned between `g.alignedCoerced`/`g.flippedAligned` and their children*:

>  - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
>  - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced`
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`
```

This is *so* hard to wrap your head around, until you remember that "any root is aligned with itself, thus anyRoot is aligned w.r.t anyOtherRoot", which I think helps give better intuition to the lines below 🤯

Reviewer: or no i dont think that is right, we would say that `g.alignedCoerced` is flipped w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced` given the example above:

```
Finally, we can list all sibling relationships:
 - `p.alignedChild` is flipped w.r.t `p.flippedChild`
```

so there is something confusing going on here. I don't understand how both of these examples can be true. why do we even care in your set of examples the relationship between g.flippedCoerced and g.alignedCoered.flippedChild? I'm going to suggest a different change to this text

>  - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
>  - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
>  - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`
```

i think this is the right fix to this block of text

In summary, `Input(gen)` and `Output(gen)` recursively coerce children alignment, as well as dictate `gen`'s alignment to its parent bundle (if it exists).

## Connecting components with fully aligned members

> For simple connections where all members of aligned (non-flipped) with one another, use `:=`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simple connections where all members are aligned (non-flipped) with one another, use `:=`:
```

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class FullyAlignedBundle extends Bundle {
  val a = Bool()
  val b = Bool()
}
class Example0 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new FullyAlignedBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new FullyAlignedBundle)
  outgoing := incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where each member of `incoming` drives every member of `outgoing`:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example0())
```

> > You may be thinking "Wait, I'm confused! Isn't foo flipped and bar is aligned?" -- Noo! Whether foo is aligned with bar makes no sense; remember, you only evaluate alignment between members of the same component or Chisel type. Because components are always aligned to themselves, `bar` is aligned to `bar`, and `foo` is aligned to `foo`, there is no problem. Their relative flippedness to anything else is irrelevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You may be thinking "Wait, I'm confused! Isn't foo flipped and bar aligned?" -- Noo! Whether foo is aligned with bar makes no sense; remember, you only evaluate alignment between members of the same component or Chisel type. Because components are always aligned to themselves, `bar` is aligned to `bar`, and `foo` is aligned to `foo`, there is no problem. Their relative flippedness to anything else is irrelevant.
```

## Connections for components with members of mixed-alignment

Aggregate Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another; in the example below, `alignedChild` and `flippedChild` are aligned/flipped relative to `MixedAlignmentBundle`.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class MixedAlignmentBundle extends Bundle {
  val alignedChild = Bool()
  val flippedChild = Flipped(Bool())
}
```

> Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. First we will investigate a common source of confusion between port-direction and connection-direction. Then, we will dive in to the Chisel connection operators useful for connecting components with members of mixed-alignments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. First we will introduce the most common Chisel connection operator, `:<>=`, useful for connecting components with members of mixed-alignments, then take a moment to investigate a common source of confusion between port-direction and connection-direction. Then, we will explore the remainder of the the Chisel connection operators.
```

A common question is if you use a mixed-alignment connection (such as `:<>=`) to connect submembers of parent components, does the alignment of the submember to their parent affect anything? The answer is no, because *alignment is always computed relative to what is being connected to, and members are always aligned with themselves.*

In the following example connecting `incoming.alignedChild` to `outgoing.alignedChild`, whether `incoming.alignedChild` is aligned with `incoming` is irrelevant because the `:<>=` only computes alignment relative to the thing being connected to, and `incoming.alignedChild` is aligned with `incoming.alignedChild`.

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example1a extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  outgoing.alignedChild :<>= incoming.alignedChild // whether incoming.alignedChild is aligned/flipped to incoming is IRRELEVANT to what gets connected with :<>=
}
```

While `incoming.flippedChild`'s alignment with `incoming` does not affect our operators, it does influence whether `incoming.flippedChild` is an output or input port of my module.

> A common source of confusion is to mistake the process for determining whether `incoming.flippedChild` is an output/input (the port-direction computation) with the process for determing how `:<>=` connects who to who (the connection-direction computation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common source of confusion is to mistake the process for determining whether `incoming.flippedChild` will resolve to a verilog `output`/`input` (the port-direction computation) with the process for determining how `:<>=` drives what with what (the connection-direction computation).
```

While both processes consider relative alignment, they are distinct.

> The port-direction computation always computes alignment relative to the component marked with `IO`. An `IO(Flipped(gen))` is an input port, and any member of `gen` that is aligned/flipped with `gen` is an input/output port. An `IO(gen)` is an output port, and any member of `gen` that is aligned/flipped with `gen` is an output/input port.

Reviewer: this isn't technically true, the port direction is actually something like `ActualDirection(BidirectionalDefault)`... do we care? What does DataMirror.directionOf return?

> The connection-direction computation always computes alignment based on explicit consumer/producer referenced for the connection. If one connects `incoming :<>= outgoing`, alignments are computed based on `incoming` and `outgoing`. If I connect `incoming.alignedChild :<>= outgoing.alignedChild`, then alignments are computed based on `incoming.alignedChild` and `outgoing.alignedChild` (and the alignment of `incoming` to `incoming.a` is irrelevant).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection-direction computation always computes alignment based on the explicit consumer/producer referenced for the connection. If one connects `incoming :<>= outgoing`, alignments are computed based on `incoming` and `outgoing`. If one connects `incoming.alignedChild :<>= outgoing.alignedChild`, then alignments are computed based on `incoming.alignedChild` and `outgoing.alignedChild` (and the alignment of `incoming` to `incoming.alignedChild` is irrelevant).
```

> This means that users can try to assign to input ports of their module! If I write `x :<>= y`, and `x` is an input to the current module, then that is what the connection is trying to do. However, because input ports are not assignable from within the current module, Chisel will throw an error. This is the same error a user would get using a mono-directioned operator: `x := y` will throw the same error if `x` is an input module. *Whether a component is assignable is irrelevant to the semantics of any connection operator assigning to it.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that users can try to assign to input ports of their module! If I write `x :<>= y`, and `x` is an input to the current module, then that is what the connection is trying to do. However, because input ports are not assignable from within the current module, Chisel will throw an error. This is the same error a user would get using a mono-directioned operator: `x := y` will throw the same error if `x` is an input to the current module. *Whether a component is assignable is irrelevant to the semantics of any connection operator assigning to it.*
```

> In summary, the port-direction computation is relative to the root marked `IO`, but connection-direction computation is relative to the consumer/producer that the connection is doing. This has the positive property that connection semantics are solely based on the Chisel types of the consumer/producer (nothing more, nothing less).

Reviewer: > solely based on the Chisel types of the consumer/producer (nothing more, nothing less).

this section makes me think Chisel type DOES include the alignment, but then again i'm unclear if you intend to include that in "chisel type equivalence" or not

Author: Hopefully my distinction between structural type equivalence and alignment type equivalence clears this up?

Reviewer: sorry, no, it doesnt help because you don't mention structural tyep or alignment type here, you jsut say chisel type and i never heard chisel type relationship to these other 2 terms is

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example3())
```

> Note: Astute observers will realize that semantically `c :<>= p` is exactly equivalent to `c :<= p` followed by `c :>= p`.

### Coercing mono-direction connection operator (:#=)

For connections where you want to every producer member to always drive every consumer member, regardless of alignment, use `:#=` (the "coercion connection"). This operator is useful for initializing wires whose types contain members of mixed alignment.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3.experimental.BundleLiterals._
class Example4 extends RawModule {
  val w = Wire(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  dontTouch(w) // So we see it in the output verilog
  w :#= (new MixedAlignmentBundle).Lit(_.alignedChild -> true.B, _.flippedChild -> true.B)
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven from the literal to `w`, regardless of alignment:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4())
```

> Note: Astute observers will realize that semantically `c :#= p` is exactly equivalent to `c :<= p` followed by `p :>= c` (note `p` and `c` switched places in the second connection).

## Waived Data

> It is not uncommon for a user to want to connect Chisel components which are not type equivalent. For example, a user may want to cook up the `ready`/`valid` members of a `ReadyValidIO` to a `DecoupledIO`, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not uncommon for a user to want to connect Chisel components which are not type equivalent. For example, a user may want to cook up the `ready`/`valid` members of a `ReadyValidIO` to a `DecoupledIO`, but
```

again, this is another section where I am unclear what "type equivalence" you are talking about. User may want to do it for Scala type equivalence or "not structurally equivalent" or "same fields but flips are different". Can you make this more clear what specifically this section is addressing

> It is not uncommon for a user to want to connect Chisel components which are not type equivalent. For example, a user may want to cook up the `ready`/`valid` members of a `ReadyValidIO` to a `DecoupledIO`, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not uncommon for a user to want to connect Chisel components which are not type equivalent. For example, a user may want to hook up the `ready`/`valid` members of a `ReadyValidIO` to a `DecoupledIO`, but
```

because the `bits` member is not present in both, our operators would reject a connection.

> `WaivedData` is the mechanism to specialize connection operator behavior in these scenarios. For any addition member which is not present in the other component being connected to, they can be explicitly waived from the operator to be ignored, rather than trigger an error.

Reviewer: I don't think WaivedData is the right thing in this example. because there is a superclassing relationship between DecoupledIO and ReadyValidIO, first of all you have to to a scala type-cast as well as the waivable. I think .viewAsSuperclass is the right pattern to suggest here.

### Connecting sub-types to super-types by waiving extra members

In the following example, we can use `:<>=` to connect a `MyReadyValid` to a `MyDecoupled` by waiving the `bits` member.

```scala mdoc:silent
class MyReadyValid extends Bundle {
  val valid = Bool()
  val ready = Flipped(Bool())
}
class MyDecoupled extends MyReadyValid {
  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
class Example5 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupled()))
  val out = IO(new MyReadyValid())

>   out :<>= in.waive(_.bits)

Reviewer: why does this even work? Do the connectable operators not require exact type matches? I think they should for exactly the reason outlined above...

}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `ready` and `valid` are connected, and `bits` is ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example5())
```

### Connecting types with optional members

> In the following example, we can use `:<>=` and `waive` to connect two `MyDecoupledOpts`'s, where only one has a `bits` member.

Reviewer: this is a better example IMHO

```scala mdoc:silent
class MyDecoupledOpt(hasBits: Boolean) extends Bundle {
  val valid = Bool()
  val ready = Flipped(Bool())
  val bits = if (hasBits) Some(UInt(32.W)) else None
}
class Example6 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupledOpt(true)))
  val out = IO(new MyDecoupledOpt(false))
  out :<>= in.waive(_.bits.get) // We can know to call .get because we can inspect in.bits.isEmpty
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `ready` and `valid` are connected, and `bits` is ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example6())
```

### Connecting different sub-types

> Note that the connection operator requires the `consumer` and `producer` to be the same Scala type to encourage capturing more information statically, but they can always be cast to `Data` or another common supertype prior to connecting.

Reviewer: if this is true i dont understand why your first example even compiled

In the following example, we can use `:<>=` and `waiveAs` to connect two different sub-types of `MyReadyValid`.

```scala mdoc:silent
class HasBits extends MyReadyValid {
  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
class HasEcho extends MyReadyValid {
  val echo = Flipped(UInt(32.W))
}
class Example7 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new HasBits()))
  val out = IO(new HasEcho())

>   out.waiveAs[MyReadyValid](_.echo) :<>= in.waiveAs[MyReadyValid](_.bits)

Reviewer: This example is really confusing to me. Is it ignoring `echo` because you told it to waive it or because `MyReadyValid` doesn't even have an `echo` field? Would this be equivalent, if not what is the point of the `MyReadyValid` in the brackets, you didn't have it in your first example.

`out.waiveAs[MyReadyValid]() :<>= in.waiveAs[MyReadyValid](_.bits)`

---

layout: docs

title:  "Connectable Operators"

section: "chisel3"

> ---

Reviewer: this doc is probably worth adding a ToC to the top of it at this point

- `Element` - a Chisel type or component that does not contain other Chisel types or components (e.g. `UInt`, `SInt`, `Clock`, `Bool` etc.)
- "component" - a `Data` that is bound to hardware (`IO`, `Reg`, `Wire`, etc.)
  - E.g. `Wire(UInt(3.W))` is a component, whose Chisel type is `UInt(3.W)`
- "member" - a Chisel type or component, or any of its children (could be an `Aggregate` or an `Element`)
  - E.g. `Vec(3, UInt(2.W))(0)` is a member of the parent `Vec` Chisel type
  - E.g. `Wire(Vec(3, UInt(2.W)))(0)` is a member of the parent `Wire` component
  - E.g. `IO(Decoupled(Bool)).ready` is a member of the parent `IO` component
- "relative alignment" - whether two members of the same component or Chisel type are aligned/flipped, relative to one another
  - see section [below](#alignment-flipped-vs-aligned) for a detailed definition
- "structural type check" - Chisel type `A` is structurally equivalent to Chisel type `B` if `A` and `B` have matching bundle field names and types (`Record` vs `Vector` vs `Element`), vector sizes, `Element` types (UInt/SInt/Bool/Clock etc))
  - ignores relative alignment (flippedness)
  - use `DataMirror.checkTypeEquivalence` to check this property

> - "alignment type check" - a Chisel type `A` matches alignment with another Chisel type `B` if every member of `A`'s relative alignment to `A` is the same as the structurally corresponding member of `B`'s relative alignment to `B`.

Reviewer: sorry i am still confused. you define chisel type above not in terms of structural type or alignment type. is chisel type equivalence = structural type equivalalence + alignment type equivalence, or not?

Author: Yes, it is (+ width type equivalence). I need to update this, because there exists no way to actually just check these properties. Also.. its a bit hand-wave-y because technically you can drive `Reset` from `Bool`, but I'm not convinced they would (or should) structurally type check.

Author: I removed 'chisel type equivalence' because that actually isn't the thing that is checked.

 - `c := p` (mono-direction): assigns all p members to c; requires c & p to not have any flipped members
 - `c :#= p` (coercing mono-direction): assigns all p members to c; regardless of alignment
 - `c :<= p` (aligned-direction); assigns all aligned (non-flipped) c members from p
 - `c :>= p` (flipped-direction); assigns all flipped p members from c
 - `c :<>= p` (bi-direction operator); assigns all aligned c members from p; all flipped p members from c

You may be seeing these random symbols in the operator and going "what the heck are these?!?". Well, it turns out that the characters are consistent between operators and self-describe the semantics of each operator:
 - `:` always indicates the consumer, or left-hand-side, of the operator.
 - `=` always indicates the producer, or right-hand-side, of the operator.
   - Hence, `c := p` connects a consumer (`c`) and a producer (`p`).
 - `<` always indicates that some members will be driven producer-to-consumer, or right-to-left.

>    - Hence, `c :<= p` drives members in producer (`p`) to members consumer (`c`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Hence, `c :<= p` drives members in producer (`p`) to members in consumer (`c`).
```

  dontTouch(w) // So we see it in the output verilog
  w :#= (new MixedAlignmentBundle).Lit(_.alignedChild -> true.B, _.flippedChild -> true.B)
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven from the literal to `w`, regardless of alignment:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4())
```

> Note: Astute observers will realize that semantically `c :#= p` is exactly equivalent to `c :<= p` followed by `p :>= c` (note `p` and `c` switched places in the second connection).

Another use case for `:#=` is for connecting a mixed-directional bundle to a fully-aligned monitor.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3.experimental.BundleLiterals._
class Example4b extends RawModule {
  val monitor = IO(Output(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val w = Wire(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  dontTouch(w) // So we see it in the output verilog
  w :#= DontCare
  monitor :#= w
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven from the literal to `w`, regardless of alignment:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4b())
```

> ## Waived Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ConnectableData
```

?

`ConnectableData` is the mechanism to specialize connection operator behavior in these scenarios. For any additional member which is not present in the other component being connected to, they can be explicitly waived from the operator to be ignored, rather than trigger an error.

In addition, there are other techniques that can be used to address similar use cases including `.viewAsSuperType`, a static cast to a supertype (e.g. `(x: T)`), or creating a custom dataview.
For a discussion about when to use each technique, please continue [here](#techniques-for-connecting-structurally-inequivalent-chisel-types).

This section demonstrates how `ConnectableData` specifically can be used in a multitude of scenarios.

### Connecting Records

A not uncommon usecase is to try to connect two Records; for matching members, they should be connected, but for unmatched members, they should be ignored. To accomplish this,  use the other operators to initialize all Record members, then use `:<>=` with `waiveAll` to connect only the matching members.

> > Note that `.viewAsSuperType`, static casts, nor a custom dataview helps this case because the types are still `Record`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note that none of `.viewAsSuperType`, static casts, nor a custom DataView helps this case because the Scala types are still `Record`.
```

```scala mdoc:silent
import scala.collection.immutable.SeqMap
import chisel3.experimental.AutoCloneType

class Example9 extends RawModule {
  val abType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap("a" -> Bool(), "b" -> Flipped(Bool())) }
  val bcType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap("b" -> Flipped(Bool()), "c" -> Bool()) }

  val p = IO(Flipped(abType))
  val c = IO(bcType)

  DontCare :>= p
  c :<= DontCare

  c.waive(_.elements("c")):<>= p.waive(_.elements("a"))
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `p.b` is driven from `c.b`:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example9())
```

### Defaults with waived connections

> A not uncommon usecase is to try to connect two Records; for matching members, they should be connected, but for unmatched members, *they should be assigned a default value*. To accomplish this, use the other operators to initialize all Record members, then use `:<>=` with `waiveAll` to connect only the matching members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another not uncommon usecase is to try to connect two Records; for matching members, they should be connected, but for unmatched members, *they should be assigned a default value*. To accomplish this, use the other operators to initialize all Record members, then use `:<>=` with `waiveAll` to connect only the matching members.
```

  out :<>= in.waive(_.bits.get) // We can know to call .get because we can inspect in.bits.isEmpty
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where `ready` and `valid` are connected, and `bits` is ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example6())
```

### Always ignore extra members (partial connection operator)

The most unsafe connection is to connect only members that are present in both consumer and producer, and ignore all other members. This is unsafe because this connection will never error on any Chisel types.

To do this, you can use `.waiveAll` and static cast to `Data`:

```scala mdoc:silent
class OnlyA extends Bundle {
  val a = UInt(32.W)
}
class OnlyB extends Bundle {
  val b = UInt(32.W)
}
class Example11 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new OnlyA()))
  val out = IO(new OnlyB())

  out := DontCare

  (out: Data).waiveAll :<>= (in: Data).waiveAll
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where nothing is connected:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example11())
```

## Techniques for connecting structurally inequivalent Chisel types

> `DataView` and `viewAsSupertype` creates a view of the component that has a different Chisel type. This means that a user can first create a `DataView` of the consumer or producer (or both) so that the Chisel types are structurally equivalent. This is useful when the difference between the consumer and producers aren't super nested, and also if they have rich Scala types which encode their structure. In general, `DataView` is the preferred mechanism to use (if you can) because it maintains the most about of Chisel information in the Scala type, but there are many instances where it doesn't work and thus one must fall back on `ConnectableData`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DataView` and `viewAsSupertype` create a view of the component that has a different Chisel type. This means that a user can first create a `DataView` of the consumer or producer (or both) so that the Chisel types are structurally equivalent. This is useful when the difference between the consumer and producers aren't super nested, and also if they have rich Scala types which encode their structure. In general, `DataView` is the preferred mechanism to use (if you can) because it maintains the most about of Chisel information in the Scala type, but there are many instances where it doesn't work and thus one must fall back on `ConnectableData`.
```

`ConnectableData` does not change the Chisel type, but instead changes the semantics of the operator to not error on the waived members if they are dangling or unassigned. This is useful for when differences between the consumer and producer do not show up in the Scala type system (e.g. present/missing fields of type `Option[Data]`, or anonymous `Record`s) or are deeply nested in a bundle that is especially onerous to create a `DataView`.

> Static casts (e.g. `(x: T)`) allows connecting components that have different Scala types, but leaves the Chisel type unchanged. Use this to force a connection to occur, even if the Scala types are different. One may wonder why the operators require identical Scala types in the first place, if they can easily be bypassed. The reason is to encourage users to use the Scala type system to encode Chisel information as it can make their code more robust; however, we don't want to be draconian about it because there are times when we want to enable the user to "just connect the darn thing".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static casts (e.g. `(x: T)`) allows connecting components that have different Scala types, but leaves the Chisel type unchanged. Use this to force a connection to occur, even if the Scala types are different.

 > One may wonder why the operators require identical Scala types in the first place, if they can easily be bypassed. The reason is to encourage users to use the Scala type system to encode Chisel information as it can make their code more robust; however, we don't want to be draconian about it because there are times when we want to enable the user to "just connect the darn thing".
```

> When all else fails one can always manually expand the connection to do what they want to happen. The down-side to this approach is its verbosity and that adding new fields to a bundle will require updating the manual connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When all else fails one can always manually expand the connection to do what they want to happen, member by member. The down-side to this approach is its verbosity and that adding new members to a component will require updating the manual connections.
```

> Things to remember about `ConnectableData` vs `viewAsSupertype`/`DataView` vs static cast (e.g. `(x: T)`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Things to remember about `ConnectableData` vs `viewAsSupertype`/`DataView` vs static cast (e.g. `(x: T)`):
```

> - Dataview and viewAsSupertype will preemptively remove members that are not present in the new view which has a different Chisel type, thus **DataView does affect what is connected**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DataView` and `viewAsSupertype` will preemptively remove members that are not present in the new view which has a different Chisel type, thus **DataView does affect what is connected**
```

> - Waived Data is used to waive the error on members who end up being dangling or unassigned. Importantly, **ConnectableData does not affect what is connected**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Waived Data is used to waive the error on members who end up being dangling or unassigned. Importantly, ConnectableData **does not** affect what is connected
```

> - Static cast does not remove extra members, thus a **static cast does not affect what is connected**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Static cast does not remove extra members, thus a static cast **does not** affect what is connected
```

```scala mdoc:silent
import experimental.dataview._
class MyDecoupledOtherBits extends MyReadyValid {
  val bits = UInt(32.W)
}
class Example12 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupled()))
  val out = IO(new MyDecoupledOtherBits())

  out := DontCare

  out.viewAsSupertype(new MyReadyValid) :<>= in.viewAsSupertype(new MyReadyValid)
}
```

Note that the `bits` fields are unconnected.

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example12())
```

The second example will use a static cast and `.waive(_.bits)` to connect them as `MyReadyValid`. Note that because the static cast does not change the Chisel type, the connection finds that both consumer and producer have a `bits` field. This means that since they are structurally equivalent, they match and are connected. The `waive(_.bits)` does nothing, because the `bits` are not dangling nor unassigned.

```scala mdoc:silent
import experimental.dataview._
class Example13 extends RawModule {
  val in  = IO(Flipped(new MyDecoupled()))
  val out = IO(new MyDecoupledOtherBits())

  out := DontCare

  out.waiveAs[MyReadyValid](_.bits) :<>= in.waiveAs[MyReadyValid](_.bits)
}
```

> Note that the `bits` fields ARE connected, even though they are waived, as `waive` just changes whether an error should be thrown if they are missing, NOT to not connect them if they are structurally equivalent.

Author: Thanks!

---

layout: docs

title:  "Connectable Operators"

section: "chisel3"

---

> ## Table of Contents

Author: Yeah, consistency is good. Thanks!

  - see section [below](#alignment-flipped-vs-aligned) for a detailed definition
- "structural type check" - Chisel type `A` is structurally equivalent to Chisel type `B` if `A` and `B` have matching bundle field names and types (`Record` vs `Vector` vs `Element`), vector sizes, `Element` types (UInt/SInt/Bool/Clock etc))
  - ignores relative alignment (flippedness)
- "alignment type check" - a Chisel type `A` matches alignment with another Chisel type `B` if every member of `A`'s relative alignment to `A` is the same as the structurally corresponding member of `B`'s relative alignment to `B`.

## Overview

The `Connectable` operators are the standard way to connect Chisel hardware components to one another.

> Note: For descriptions of the semantics for the previous operators, see [`Connection Operators`](connection-operators).

All connection operators require the two hardware components (consumer and producer) to be structurally type equivalent.

The one exception to the structural type-equivalence rule is using the `Connectable` mechanism, detailed at this [section](#waived-data) towards the end of this document.

> Aggregate (`Record`, `Vec`, `Bundle`) Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another. Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. The following are the Chisel connection operators:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregate (`Record`, `Vec`, `Bundle`) Chisel types can include data members which are flipped relative to one another.
Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components.
The following are the Chisel connection operators:
```

Because newlines don't impact the result, it's generally advisable in markdown (and really most markdown/up formats) to include newlines between sentences which reduces diff noise/merge conflicts when editing the files in the future.

 - `c := p` (mono-direction): connects all p members to c; requires c & p to not have any flipped members
 - `c :#= p` (coercing mono-direction): connects all p members to c; regardless of alignment
 - `c :<= p` (aligned-direction); connects all aligned (non-flipped) c members from p
 - `c :>= p` (flipped-direction); connects all flipped p members from c
 - `c :<>= p` (bi-direction operator); connects all aligned c members from p; all flipped p members from c

> You may be seeing these random symbols in the operator and going "what the heck are these?!?". Well, it turns out that the characters are consistent between operators and self-describe the semantics of each operator:

Author: Yeah agreed.

 - `:` always indicates the consumer, or left-hand-side, of the operator.
 - `=` always indicates the producer, or right-hand-side, of the operator.

>    - Hence, `c := p` connects a consumer (`c`) and a producer (`p`).

Reviewer: this seems best as a `>` note maybe not right here

>    - Hence, `c := p` connects a consumer (`c`) and a producer (`p`).

Author: Yup, thanks!

We use the following example of a non-nested bundle `Parent` to let us state all of the alignment relationships between members of `p`.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class Parent extends Bundle {
  val alignedChild = UInt(32.W)
  val flippedChild = Flipped(UInt(32.W))
}
class MyModule0 extends Module {
  val p = Wire(new Parent)
}
```

First, every member is always aligned with themselves:
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p`
 - `p.alignedChild` is aligned w.r.t `p.alignedChild`
 - `p.flippedChild` is aligned w.r.t `p.flippedChild`

Next, we list all parent/child relationships. Because the `flippedChild` field is `Flipped`, it changes its aligment relative to its parent. 
 - `p` is aligned w.r.t `p.alignedChild`
 - `p` is flipped w.r.t `p.flippedChild`

Finally, we can list all sibling relationships:
 - `p.alignedChild` is flipped w.r.t `p.flippedChild`

The next example has a nested bundle `GrandParent` who instantiates an aligned `Parent` field and flipped `Parent` field.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class GrandParent extends Bundle {

>   val alignedParent = new Parent()
>   val flippedParent = Flipped(new Parent())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  val alignedParent = new Parent
  val flippedParent = Flipped(new Parent)
```
Generally there should be parentheses if the class takes no arguments, and we should also try to be consistent (above and below you seems to do both equally).

Author: Yeah, it's one of my many flaws is a blindness to this particular syntactic issue... Thanks!

 - `g.alignedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedParent` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.alignedChild`
 - `g.alignedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.alignedParent.flippedChild`
 - `g.flippedParent` is flipped w.r.t. `g.flippedParent.flippedChild`

In summary, a member is aligned or flipped w.r.t. another member of the hardware component. This means that the type of the consumer/producer is the only information needed to determine the behavior of any operator. *Whether the consumer/producer is a member of a larger bundle is irrelevant; you ONLY need to know the type of the consumer/producer*.

## Input/Output

`Input(gen)`/`Output(gen)` are coercing operators. They perform two functions: (1) create a new Chisel type that has all flips removed from all recursive children members (still structurally equivalent to `gen` but no longer alignment type equivalent), and (2) apply `Flipped` if `Input`, keep aligned (do nothing) if `Output`. E.g. if we imagine a function called `cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips`, then `Input(gen)` is structurally and alignment type equivalent to `Flipped(cloneChiselTypeButStripAllFlips(gen))`.

> Note that if `gen` is a non-aggregate, then `Input(nonAggregateGen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(nonAggregateGen)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that if `gen` is an element, then `Input(elementGen)` is equivalent to `Flipped(elementGen)`.
```

Author: Elements can be aggregates though, no?

 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.alignedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.alignedCoerced.flippedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.alignedChild`
 - `g.flippedCoerced` is aligned w.r.t. `g.flippedCoerced.flippedChild`

In summary, `Input(gen)` and `Output(gen)` recursively coerce children alignment, as well as dictate `gen`'s alignment to its parent bundle (if it exists).

## Connecting components with fully aligned members

### Mono-direction connection operator (:=)

For simple connections where all members are aligned (non-flipped) w.r.t. one another, use `:=`:

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class FullyAlignedBundle extends Bundle {
  val a = Bool()
  val b = Bool()
}
class Example0 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new FullyAlignedBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new FullyAlignedBundle)
  outgoing := incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where each member of `incoming` drives every member of `outgoing`:

```scala mdoc:verilog

> import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
> 
> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example0())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
getVerilogString(new Example0)
```
[relatively] recent addition to package `chisel3` which is pretty great!

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class MixedAlignmentBundle extends Bundle {
  val alignedChild = Bool()
  val flippedChild = Flipped(Bool())
}
```

Due to this, there are many desired connection behaviors between two Chisel components. First we will introduce the most common Chisel connection operator, `:<>=`, useful for connecting components with members of mixed-alignments, then take a moment to investigate a common source of confusion between port-direction and connection-direction. Then, we will explore the remainder of the the Chisel connection operators.

### Bi-direction connection operator (:<>=)

For connections where you want 'bulk-connect-like-semantics' where the aligned members are driven producer-to-consumer and flipped members are driven consumer-to-producer, use `:<>=`.

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example1 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  outgoing :<>= incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where the aligned members are driven `incoming` to `outgoing` and flipped members are driven `outgoing` to `incoming`:

```scala mdoc:verilog

> import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
> 
> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example1())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
getVerilogString(new Example1)
```

Author: Yup, thanks!

In summary, the port-direction computation is relative to the root marked `IO`, but connection-direction computation is relative to the consumer/producer that the connection is doing. This has the positive property that connection semantics are solely based on the Chisel structural type and its relative alignments of the consumer/producer (nothing more, nothing less).

### Aligned connection operator (:<=)

For connections where you want the aligned-half of 'bulk-connect-like-semantics' where the aligned members are driven producer-to-consumer and flipped members are ignored, use `:<=` (the "aligned connection").

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example2 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  incoming.flippedChild := DontCare // Otherwise FIRRTL throws an uninitialization error
  outgoing :<= incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where the aligned members are driven `incoming` to `outgoing` and flipped members are ignored:

```scala mdoc:verilog

> import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
> 
> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example2())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
getVerilogString(new Example2)
```

```

### Flipped connection operator (:>=)

For connections where you want the flipped-half of 'bulk-connect-like-semantics' where the aligned members are ignored and flipped members are connected consumer-to-producer, use `:<=` (the "flipped connection", or "backpressure connection").

```scala mdoc:silent
class Example3 extends RawModule {
  val incoming = IO(Flipped(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val outgoing = IO(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  outgoing.alignedChild := DontCare // Otherwise FIRRTL throws an uninitialization error
  outgoing :>= incoming
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where the aligned members are ignore and the flipped members are driven `outgoing` to `incoming`:

```scala mdoc:verilog

> import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
> 
> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example3())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
getVerilogString(new Example3)
```

Reviewer 2: I think you should do this for all of them but I ran out of steam suggesting the change.

class Example4 extends RawModule {
  val w = Wire(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  dontTouch(w) // So we see it in the output verilog
  w :#= (new MixedAlignmentBundle).Lit(_.alignedChild -> true.B, _.flippedChild -> true.B)
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven from the literal to `w`, regardless of alignment:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4())
```

> Note: Astute observers will realize that semantically `c :#= p` is exactly equivalent to `c :<= p` followed by `p :>= c` (note `p` and `c` switched places in the second connection).

Another use case for `:#=` is for connecting a mixed-directional bundle to a fully-aligned monitor.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3.experimental.BundleLiterals._
class Example4b extends RawModule {
  val monitor = IO(Output(new MixedAlignmentBundle))
  val w = Wire(new MixedAlignmentBundle)
  dontTouch(w) // So we see it in the output verilog
  w :#= DontCare
  monitor :#= w
}
```

This generates the following Verilog, where all members are driven from the literal to `w`, regardless of alignment:

```scala mdoc:verilog
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage

> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4b())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Example4b)
```

similar to jack's feedback above with the ()

In addition, there are other techniques that can be used to address similar use cases including `.viewAsSuperType`, a static cast to a supertype (e.g. `(x: T)`), or creating a custom dataview.
For a discussion about when to use each technique, please continue [here](#techniques-for-connecting-structurally-inequivalent-chisel-types).

This section demonstrates how `Connectable` specifically can be used in a multitude of scenarios.

### Connecting Records

A not uncommon usecase is to try to connect two Records; for matching members, they should be connected, but for unmatched members, they should be ignored. To accomplish this, use the other operators to initialize all Record members, then use `:<>=` with `waiveAll` to connect only the matching members.

> Note that none of `.viewAsSuperType`, static casts, nor a custom DataView helps this case because the Scala types are still `Record`.

```scala mdoc:silent
import scala.collection.immutable.SeqMap
import chisel3.experimental.AutoCloneType

> 
> class Example9 extends RawModule {
>   val abType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap("a" -> Bool(), "b" -> Flipped(Bool())) }
>   val bcType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap("b" -> Flipped(Bool()), "c" -> Bool()) }

Reviewer: ```suggestion

class Example9 extends RawModule {
  val abType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap(
    "a" -> Bool(),
    "b" -> Flipped(Bool()
  )) }
  val bcType = new Record with AutoCloneType { val elements = SeqMap(
    "b" -> Flipped(Bool()),
    "c" -> Bool()
    ) }
```

perhaps?

Reviewer: (or, save this for later -- did you know we can run scalafmt on our .md files too...

---

## Terminology

- "Chisel type" - a `Data` that is not bound to hardware
- "component" - a `Data` that is bound to hardware (`IO`, `Reg`, `Wire`, etc.)
- "member" - a child Chisel type/component of a parent Chisel type or component

> - "field" - a named member of a `Record` or `Bundle` Chisel type or component

Reviewer: not sure i get the difference between `member` and `field`. Also what is the difference from that and `element` which is used in the code?

Maybe you could "use it in a sentence" and show an example of a Bundle and say "foo is a component", "foo.bar is a member", "bar is a field" ??

Author: yeah, I think member and element are similar?

Author: `Element` means `Non-Aggregate`, so I'm going to use the 'member' terminology.

The connection-direction computation always computes alignment based on the explicit consumer/producer referenced for the connection. If one connects `incoming :<>= outgoing`, alignments are computed based on `incoming` and `outgoing`. If one connects `incoming.alignedChild :<>= outgoing.alignedChild`, then alignments are computed based on `incoming.alignedChild` and `outgoing.alignedChild` (and the alignment of `incoming` to `incoming.alignedChild` is irrelevant).

> This means that users can try to connect to input ports of their module! If I write `x :<>= y`, and `x` is an input to the current module, then that is what the connection is trying to do. However, because input ports are not connectable from within the current module, Chisel will throw an error. This is the same error a user would get using a mono-directioned operator: `x := y` will throw the same error if `x` is an input to the current module. *Whether a component is connectable is irrelevant to the semantics of any connection operator connecting to it.*

Reviewer 2: I agree, we should use different terminology here like "assignable", "drivable", or "writeable".

We probably need to do hash out all of our terminology and then audit our docs to make sure they're consistent.
